[Music]
humanity has explored the depths of our
oceans
we've reached the vacuum of space we dig
underground mazes and ride trains in
them and wherever we go hey we need to
go so we tend to need toilets so how
does that work when you're in a
submarine or down in the subway or
floating above the earth in the ISS and
aren't you glad you asked of course you
are
before we um take a seat let's head
underground in New York City there are
472 stations in the New York City subway
system 51 of those have restrooms if one
day all those five million commuters
needed to go to the John at the same
time then you can expect a line of
almost 50,000 people at each of those
facilities as for each restroom men and
women's this will be a long wait ah
finally it's your turn you do your
business and flush the toilet and your
bladder is much gladder what happens
next
well yeah you wash your hands but I mean
where does it all go after you flush the
material enters a complex sewer system
complex because usually underground
rivers with rainwater flow here making
the soil soft and unstable now unstable
soil isn't something you want to hear
when you're underground surrounded by
concrete metal and fast-moving trains
that's why complicated drainage systems
are installed in the subway these
systems divert water from the soil pass
it through strong pipes and it
accumulates in special wells then the
water spills into the city sewage system
now let's take a deep dive into the
ocean leave your scuba gear we're going
even deeper to a submarine that's about
900 feet down just imagine going to the
99th floor the Empire State Building
only that far down under the water
whoo fun let's explore there are two
bathrooms in this sub one is needed
underwater the second works only when
the submarine flows to the surface by
the way the toilets are
heads here so let's head to the first
head but be careful if you don't flush
this toilet correctly say you just flush
the stuff into the sea then it won't be
pretty when you're that far down below
the surface the water pressure is
unfathomable
you hear about it in pounds per square
inch or psi at nine hundred feet below
imagine having four hundred pounds of
force pushing on every square inch of
you from all sides down here you simply
can't flush water into the ocean
the high pressure outside the vessel
would just come spewing in and that
equals danger danger Will Robinson so
when you flush you open a valve and the
stuff in the bowl gets washed into a
holding tank below a lot of like toilets
on airplanes but here's the difference
eventually that tank gets full uh-huh
unlike airplanes that have their holding
tanks pump clean when they land after a
few hours of flight subs can be
submerged for months at a time so what
do they do when they need more room in
the tank
well they pump it full of air pressure
and send it out into the ocean but don't
worry
they never do that anywhere near the
coast where you're splashing around in
the water on your beach vacation
Plus that deep down the toilet contents
wouldn't even make it to the surface
they get crushed to the bottom and
service fish food oh hey Nemo it's lunch
time on that note we'll let the fish
food sink to the bottom well you and I
head back to the surface we find
ourselves on a yacht ooh fancy if you
want to use the head yep say name here
too it's a maritime thing you might need
some help
notice anything strange there's no flush
button you have to use a special pump
switch at once and it brings water into
the bowl from the sea switch it again
and it flushes the waste into you got it
a holding tank then you need to switch
yet again to keep water from entering
the tank which will be emptied at the
port and whatever you do never throw
paper or any garbage into the toilet
this will lead to a severe blow
package that you don't want to deal with
okay I'm getting a little seasick time
to head back to land oh look a Winnebago
let's see what's going on with its
toilet everything is much simpler here
these temporary homes on wheels are
equipped with dry closets you do your
job
press one button to open the hole then
press another and hold until the water
rinses everything into yep a holding
tank you just can't leave that stuff
wherever you want when your road trip is
over or the tank is too full you safely
dispose of the contents but what if I'm
the happy owner of an RV and I don't
want to go anywhere near that stuff it's
okay there are special companies that
deal with emptying dry closets but we're
already at our next stop a train station
let's investigate the loo here too if
it's an older train say 30 years or so
you'd have to wait until it goes a
sufficient distance from the city only
after that are the laboratories opened
you do your business press the flush
button and everything gets poured right
onto the railway tracks mm-hmm this is
where the phrase you're on the right
track comes from no actually it isn't
fortunately we're already moving past
this as trains become more modernized
with dry closets and the holding tanks
these new trains use a vacuum pump to
get the contents into the tank which of
course is emptied at the station not
along the way and that's all the poop on
tracks we've arrived at the terminal
station but hurry we have a plane to
catch
I briefly mentioned airplane toilets
when we were checking out the head on
that submarine but what about that loud
sound you hear when you flush the toilet
on a jet at this airplanes make smart
use of the air pressure difference
inside and outside the cabin planes are
pumped full of air so that you and I can
breathe that high up in the sky where
the air is thin so when you flush the
high pressure in the cabin literally
pushes your residue down into the
holding tank which has much lower
pressure that noise you hear is the air
moving hundreds of miles per hour
we're going higher and higher until we
arrive at the International Space
Station before we investigate their
restroom here's a fun fact the toilet on
this station cost 19 million dollars no
it's not made of pure gold that would
have been much cheaper it's because
there John is equipped with a very
complex waste management system that is
waste gets turned into drinking water
and breathable air here we go inside the
toilet looks like a space throne when
you sit down you fasten your seat belt
because otherwise zero gravity would
have you floating above the seat hmm a
vacuum is created between you and the
toilet so that no bits manage to escape
you do your thing and press the flush
button after that anything solid or
liquid is separated the solid stuff
falls into a container it'll be sent to
earth with the next spacecraft the
liquid goes to its own compartment it
rotates very quickly and the centrifuge
is heated the liquid evaporates under
pressure and high temperature
condensation appears in an external
chamber from there the condensed water
enters another tank all other moisture
from the ISS like the astronauts sweat
and exhaled air goes into the same tank
from here water enters a special
separator where the liquid is cleaned of
odors and passes through several levels
of filtration after that the water is
heated and sanitized and voila
we have clean water in fact 85% of
liquid waste can be processed into pure
water oh and from the same water you can
create oxygen in a process called
electrolysis an electric current is
passed through the water and it's
molecules start to break down remember
chemistry class back in school a water
molecule is two parts hydrogen one part
oxygen h2o those oxygen atoms get
collected in cylinders and astronauts
can breathe easy
but where do the remaining hydrogen
molecules go there is such a thing as
this Sabatier reaction for this the
hydrogen remaining from the electrolysis
of water is mixed with carbon dioxide
the stuff we produce with each exhale in
the end you get water it's an endless
efficient cycle and now I see why the
toilet cost 19 million bucks
finally this thought why are toilets
like really bad banks because after you
make a deposit it somehow disappears ah
come on it was funny in third grade hey
if you learn something new today to give
the video a like and share it with a
friend and here are some other cool
videos I think you'll enjoy just click
to the left or right and remember stay
on the bright side of life